.\"Modified from man(1) of FreeBSD, the NetBSD mdoc.template, and mdoc.samples.
.\"See Also:
.\"man mdoc.samples for a complete listing of options
.\"man mdoc for the short list of editing options
.\"/usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
.Dd 03/11/2009               \" DATE 
.Dt shefLMStore 1 URM   \" Program name and manual section number 
.Os Linux/Unix/MacOSXnix
.Sh NAME                 \" Section Header - required - don't modify 
.Nm shefLMStore
.\" Use .Nm macro to designate other names for the documented program.
.Nd fast and space efficient storage and retrieval of large language models
.Sh SYNOPSIS             \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm
.Op Fl h              \" [-abcd]
.Op Fl g Ar outputBaseFileName         \" [-a path] 
.Op Fl l Ar inputBaseFileName
.Op Fl f Ar bits_per_fp
.Op Fl b Ar bits_per_rank
.Op Fl q Ar queryfile              \" [-q file]
.Ar keyfile			\"underlined file
.Sh DESCRIPTION          \" Section Header - required - don't modify
.Nm \"Program name
Creates a minimum perfect hash that maps all the keys in the keyfile to unique indicies.  After the hash function is created it is used to store the rank of the values associated with each key in a compressed way. After the creation of the hash and value store these parts can be serialized to disk so that on subsequent runs of the program they can be loaded and used quickly.
.Pp                      \" Inserts a space
.Nm \"Program name
takes a keyfile argument that contains keys and values to store and a queryfile that contains keys who's values to look up.  One or both of these files can be gzipped as long as they end in the .gz extention.  
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Begins a tagged list 
.It Fl q Ar queryfile
File with ngrams one per line to query for values in the language model.  This file is optional. If no queryfile is given on the command line then program will read from stdin.  This makes it usefull for piping queries to lookup.  If the query file is formated like a keyfile i.e. NGRAM\\tVALUE, then the program will lookup the ngram and check to make sure it is the same as the value in the file.  If the -k option is specified the file should be words instead of ngrams.
.It Ar keyfile
This file is used to read keys and values for constructing the perfect hash function and the value arrays.  It will not be used if the -l option is specified.  This file should be pre-sorted by VALUE (for ngrams they should be acending so that the most comman rank is first).  The format of this file is ngrams and values seprated by tab i.e. NGRAM\\tVALUE.  All ngrams in this file MUST be unique!!!  If the ngrams are not unique then it will not be possible to generate a minimal perfect hash to map these n-grams to unique integers and this currently causes the program to crash (gracelessly).
.El                      \" Ends the list
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width -indent  \" Differs from above in tag removed 
.It Fl h                 \"-a flag as a list item
Prints a help message and quits.
.It Fl g
Write all files needed for MPHR structure to disk using the filename prefix specified.  Two files will be written using the basename prefix specified and ending in .hash and .fp_values.
.It Fl l
Load the MPHR structure using the filename prefix specified.  .hash, and .fp_values files must exist with the given prefix.  If this option is given no keyfile is needed.
.It Fl b
Number of bits to use for each rank, default is 20.
.It Fl f
Number of bits to use for each fingerprint, default is 12.
.It Fl k
Compte Knesser Ney perplexity on the query file.  In this case the query file shold be a text file of words seperated by whitespace.  This option requires you to have stored special counts needed for KN in your language model.
.El                      \" Ends the list
.Pp
The -b and -f options have no effect if loading a structure with the -l option.
.Pp
.Sh EXAMPLES
  # To store a language model from an n-gram
.br
  # key value file called MixedGramKeyValueFile.gz
.br
$ 
.Nm
-g myModel MixedGramKeyValueFile.gz
.br

.br
  # To look up the language model values for items 
.br
  # in a query file, using the stored hash,ranks,and values.
.br
  # (notice no keyfile is needed if we load a structure from disk)
.br
$ 
.Nm
-l myModel -q queryFile.txt
.br

.br
  # Queries will also be read from stdin if no queryfile is given. 
.br
$ cat queryFile | ./
.Nm
-l myModel
.br

.br
  # A hash can also be constructed, saved, and queried in one step
.br
  # by specifing both the -g and -q options 
.br
$ 
.Nm
-g myModel -q queryFile MixedGramKeyValueFile.gz
.br
.Sh AUTHOR
.Nm
was written by David Guthrie (dguthrie@dcs.shef.ac.uk).  It makes use of boost (www.boost.org), zlib (www.zlib.net), the cmph library (cmph.sourceforge.net) by Davi de Castro Reis (davi@users.sourceforge.net) and Fabiano Cupertino Botelho (fc_botelho@users.sourceforge.net), and the sux c++ library (sux.dsi.unimi.it) by Sebastiano Vigna.
.\" .Sh ENVIRONMENT      \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -tag -width "ENV_VAR_1" -indent \" ENV_VAR_1 is width of the string ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_1
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_1
.\" .It Ev ENV_VAR_2
.\" Description of ENV_VAR_2
.\" .El                      
.\".Sh FILES                \" File used or created by the topic of the man page
.\".Bl -tag -width "/Users/joeuser/Library/really_long_file_name" -compact
.\".It Pa /usr/share/file_name
.\"FILE_1 description
.\".It Pa /Users/joeuser/Library/really_long_file_name
.\"FILE_2 description
.\".El                      \" Ends the list
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS       \" May not be needed
.\" .Bl -diag
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .It Diagnostic Tag
.\" Diagnostic informtion here.
.\" .El
.\".Sh SEE ALSO 
.\" List links in ascending order by section, alphabetically within a section.
.\" Please do not reference files that do not exist without filing a bug report
.\".Xr a 1 , 
.\" .Sh BUGS              \" Document known, unremedied bugs 
.\" .Sh HISTORY           \" Document history if command behaves in a unique manner 